My name is Mercedes López-Morales,
and I'm an astronomer at the Center for Astrophysics.
I study exoplanets, which are planets
that orbit around stars other than the sun.
Right now, it is very important
to take care of our own Earth.
However, humans are curious creatures
and we will never stop wondering
if we are alone in the universe.
And so, in that sense, some of us
will have to continue searching for planets elsewhere
to be able to provide humanity with the answer
to this question that we have had for centuries
of are we alone in the universe,
and is there a life elsewhere?
As you look at other stars,
it turns out that pretty much every star has a planet.
We basically have been finding these planets
for almost like 30 years now.
And the most successful technique
is what we call the transit technique,
which basically takes advantage
of some of these planets actually crossing
in front of the star from our point of view.
So it's like a little eclipse.
So you know, every time the planet
goes in front of the star,
you see this little dip in the light coming from the star,
and that little dip is produced by a planet,
so you know that we have a planet there.
Initially, all the transiting planets
were discovered with very small telescopes from the ground,
for example, WASP-96B was discovered
by the Wide-Angle Search for Planets project,
which is basically a group of very, very small telescopes
that were monitoring the sky over and over and over,
looking for these little dips in, you know,
in the light coming from the star.
The advantage of small telescopes from the ground
is that unlike big professional telescopes,
you can use these telescopes all the time
and you can stare at stars for a very long period of time.
So they're really, really good
at finding transiting planets.
That was the technology that we had more than a decade ago.
And if you compare the original WASP-96 light curve
with what we can do now for that same planet with JWST,
you see that the original light curve
was really, really noisy.
We could barely see that 1% drop in light.
When now, with James Webb,
you can easily see like a very, very precise
transit light curve.
So, the technology has come a long way,
but if it hadn't been for the very small telescopes
on the ground initially,
we wouldn't be here in this field.
With the techniques that we have right now,
we still cannot detect a planet exactly like Earth,
that is, a planet the size of our Earth,
around a star like the sun,
or within in a one-year period.
Our technology doesn't allow us to do that just yet.
However, with the technology that we have,
we have found over 6,000 planets right now
that all of them are much closer to their host stars.
You know, we are talking about planets
that go around the stars
on periods of about like from three days to about 100 days.
And for those type of planets,
we have seen pretty much everything.
We have seen planets the size of Jupiter,
Saturn, Neptune, you name it,
all the way down to Mars-size planets.
So these systems that we have found so far,
you know, in size, the planets are similar
to the planets in the solar system,
but the properties of these planets
are fairly different to the solar system.
To begin with, they're all like hotter versions
of our own solar system planets.
And that is fascinating
because it means that everything that we have found so far
is not like the solar system.
So one of the open questions in exoplanets is,
how common are solar systems out there?
Are we a very unique system,
or we don't know yet because our techniques
don't allow us to see systems like ours?
Even James Webb,
with all the superb capabilities that it has,
is not sensitive enough
to detect the atmospheres of terrestrial planets.
And the only reason for that is that we are talking about
a signal that is one part in a hundred thousand
or one part in a million.
So, it's very, very small.
So, the next frontier in this field
is to be able to characterize the atmospheres
of planets like Earth.
But that is going to have to wait a little bit.
NASA is currently developing this new mission
called the Habitable Worlds Observatory,
and that mission is going to be like specifically designed
to characterize atmospheres of planets like Earth.
If you're a young person interested in exoplanets,
as I was 20 years ago, stick to it.
This field moves very quickly,
the technology moves very quickly,
and there's many contributions that you can do.
You can be an instrument builder, you can be an observer,
you can analyze data looking for more transiting planets.
You can analyze data with those transiting planets
looking for molecules
and chemical elements in the atmosphere.
There's a still a long way to go for us,
and I'm not going to do it,
you are going to do it.
So, if this is what you want to do,
stick to it, and it's going to be a lot of fun.
(upbeat music)